You might think that the
number of computations
you can do per unit
of time is what
limits the performance in
high performance computing.
And at the end of the day,
that's of course true.
But it's a little
bit more nuanced.
If you do computations,
of course you need data.
And the data is stored in the
random access memory, or RAM,
of your computer.
And that needs to be transported
to a central processing
unit, or CPU.
This is a process which
happens continuously
while you're computing.
And of course, new data
is being transported.
But if the data
is reused, it has
to be transported again
from RAM to your CPU.
And basically,
that's your problem,
because it takes
something like 200 cycles
to transport data
from RAM to CPU.
And in 200 cycles you can
also do 200 multiplications
or additions, and
on modern hardware
you can even do 200
multiplications and additions.
CPU manufacturers have realised
that for quite some time,
and they added caches.
So, when something is
transported from RAM
to the CPU, it's also
stored in the local cache.
And the advantage is
that it remains there
for quite a while, unless
the cache gets full.
Then it gets evicted.
Until that happens,
the transport
only has to be done once.
And if the data is reused, it
is simply reused from cache.
The cache is of course
much smaller than the RAM.
It's also much more
expensive to manufacture.
But the big advantage is that
it only takes five to 10 cycles
to get data from the
cache into the CPU's
registers for computing.
Of course, in reality, things
are a bit more complicated.
A CPU consists of
multiple cores.
Those are the
processing units that
do the actual computations.
For each core, you have
a number of caches.
There's a level one
cache that is typically
32 kilobytes for data, and
32 kilobytes for instruction.
And it has very fast access
times; five to 10 cycles.
There's also a level two cache.
This is larger, and
depending on the hardware,
it can be either 256
kilobytes, or even up
to a megabyte of data.
Access times for level two cache
are approximately 20 cycles.
A CPU has multiple cores,
up to, at the moment, 32
or 64 cores for one CPU.
So basically, this of
course is fairly complex.
And each of those cores also has
access to a level three cache,
also called last level cache.
That's even larger.
That's 3 to 25 megabytes.
But of course, it's
shared by multiple cores.
The access times are
approximately 50 cycles.
And that, of course,
has to be set off
to the RAM, which is
typically 8 to 256 gigabytes.
But it requires 200
cycles to access.